---
layout: post
title:  "Creating Space: Goals for January 2020"
date:   2020-01-27
categories: [goals]
tags: [2020goals]
---
This is my first set of [monthly goals for 2020]({% post_url 2020-01-22-2020-goals %}){:target="_blank"}.

When I think about what's blocking me from achieving more of my goals, the most
immediately obvious answer is that I just don't have a good system in place for
allocating time and energy outside of my normal recurring obligations. I have
a schedule, and anything outside of that schedule is "relaxation time". In order
to achieve any of the things I want to achieve in 2020, I'll need significant
amounts of time and energy where I can be productive, while being flexible on
what exactly I'll be working on during that time. This is my main theme for
January: setting up a productive space to use in future months.

On top of this, it seems that any habit or goal is most fragile in the first few
weeks, making January a particularly critical time. This whole project could fall
apart unless I set achievable goals and craft structures to make adhering to
them as likely as possible.

With that in mind, I have selected a few goals for January. It was actually
tricky just to spend adequate amounts of time thinking through what I wanted
the goals to be and planning out how to maximize success likelihood. I ended
up relying on New Year's enthusiasm and sacrificing some other scheduled work,
which is not sustainable. In the future I expect to use the time set aside by
my January habits to craft the goals for subsequent months.

I would also like
to improve my ability to make predictions about my likelihood of following
through on various types of goals with various structures, in order to better
plan around potential roadblocks. Towards that end I'll be making probabilistic
predictions about these goals, and rating them at the end of the month. Whenver
there is a parenthetical probability - such as (60%) - that means I am assigning
60% probability on the previous prediction being correct. Doing this has also
helped me identify where my goals are weakest, such that I can focus on getting
better structures to support them.

Without further ado, my first set of monthly goals:

## Goal 1: Accountability
My first goal for the month is setting up a consistent accountability structure.
This has two parts: a one-time setup process to make sure I have accountability
in January, and a recurring process to carry forward into future months.

In order to actually succeed with these goals, I need to do some pre-month work.
This includes taking a step back, thinking through my life, and selecting goals
for this first pivotal month. It also includes setting up systems to support
me in actually following through. On January 2nd I decided I needed to invest
significant time into figuring out what these goals were and writing them out.
Then I'd need to find a
["challenge network"](https://twitter.com/adammgrant/status/940719732843515905?lang=en){:target="_blank"}
of 2+ people who are
actually capable of holding me to a high standard, and get them to agree to read
through the document and hold me to it. If you are reading this now, you can
probably guess how that went (and I am extremely grateful to those who
agreed to fulfill this role for me).

The recurring structure I want to build to support future months is an extension
of the one above. Each month I will spend some time thinking of appropriate goals
for the coming month, write them out, and send them to my challenge network. In
addition, I will write these up as a public blog post (hello, self-reference!)
and follow up with a retrospective at the end of the month. This retrospective
will take a look at what went right and wrong over that month and clarify my
learnings.

As an interesting aside, I initially assigned 95% probability to
getting the pre-month work done on January 2nd. It turned
out to be much more work than I was anticipating, and didn't fit into the time I
had allotted. However, because I had assigned such an aggressive probability I
felt more inclinded to spend extra effort making sure it happened. If I had instead
estimated a 50% chance of success, I think my actual likelihood of finishing would
be closer to 50%. This means
there is a feedback loop from the probability I estimate to the final outcome,
where higher probabilities increased the actual likelihood of success. I
expect this to only be true if I actually believed the estimate when I made it
(so I can't game this by assinging 99% to everything). I'm not entirely sure what
to do with this information, but for now I'll keep an eye on it. If it seems like
a range of probability estimates that would be "correct" (such that my actual
odds of success match whatever number I choose to give in that range) I'll just
pick the most favorable number in that range.

Note that this goal is time-negative. Adhering to it requires spending productive
time and energy, and that has to come from somewhere. I'm not currently very good
about allocating these kinds of resources, but the following 2 goals
attempt to set up this kind of productive space. *If* at least one of the below
goals is achieved, then my estimated likelihood of successfully sketching out a
January retrospective and coming up with February goals is 80%. I consider this the
"minimal" set of criteria for bringing forward a recurring accountability structure.
My estimate for completing the "full" set of criteria in this goal is 50%, mostly
just out of the possibility that I decide to actually write and publish January
posts in February. This wouldn't be that big a failure (*if* I actually do them).
I'm treating the non-minimal criteria as lower priority than everything else in
my January goals.

## Goal 2: Weekend Space
I currently struggle with being productive at home, as this is historically my
"relaxation spot". This is especially true on weekends. In January I want to
spend at least 2 hours each of the 4 weekends in a productive headspace at a
local library. Other than that, I can spend the time doing whatever I feel like
in the moment.

There are some high-priority tasks on my plate that I will probably feel some
amount of pressure to do, but for now I will always maintain the option of
just ignoring those and doing something that feels more pleasant. My main
concern this month is just setting up adherence and getting the ball rolling,
so I'll avoid anything that would decrease my likelihood of sticking with
this - such as enforcing unpleasant tasks. Fortunately none of these *has* to
be completed by the end of January. The only task I'd like to actually ensure
I'm scheduling is the writing of blog posts needed to complete Goal 1.

I have scheduled calendar events for this time, and if something comes up that
conflicts with the schedule, I will successfully reschedule to a different time
and go anyways (80%). There should not be any full-weekend events or excessively
last-minute priority schedules in January that I can't work around (90%). If I
arrive to the library later than scheduled, I will just shift back my plans so
that I am spending at least 2 hours there (95%+).

I have a pretty strong intuitive notion of what a "productive headspace" is, so
I don't expect that to be something I am likely to game (95%+). I expect that I
will spend most of my time in ways that I wouldn't predict ahead of time (65%).

*If* the pre-month component of Goal 1 is completed and I have an accountability
structure in place, then I assign around 70% likelihood that I successfully spend
the appropriate time over all weekends. 75% if I can get someone to join me on the
first trip to the library. Much of the lost probability is just due to overall
uncertainty since this is the first time I'm doing something like this. I'd roughly
estimate 10% chance that some scheduling thing will come up that I can't work around,
10% chance that something comes up that I *could* schedule around but use as an
excuse not to go, and 10% chance that I come up with some other excuse in the moment
for not going one of the weeks. Most of this is concentrated on the first weekend
or two.

## Goal 3: Weekday Space
Very much in line with the goal above, I want to clear some freeform productive
space on weekdays. This means at least 45 minutes in a continuous block.
45 minutes is my standard
[pomodoro](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pomodoro_Technique){:target="_blank"}
time and feels like a good unit
of work. This does not apply to any "weird" days where I'm on an unusual schedule
(if I'm sick, holidays, etc). It would be nice to still be productive on at
least some of these days, but that feels like it should be beyond the scope
of what I target this month.

I have two types of daily schedules, so I'd need to make this work in both. In
the first schedule (which I'll just call **A**) I expect it will be really
easy to accomplish this as I'm already basically there (95%).
On **B** schedule days I have a convenient time to do this, but it's reliant on
me remembering at the appropriate time that I am supposed to be doing this kind
of "productive headspace". My estimate of having at most one failure to use this
time on **B** schedule days is 65%, and getting the number that high required
investing some time in setting a
[TAP](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/wJutA2czyFg6HbYoW/what-are-trigger-action-plans-taps){:target="_blank"}
to remember this.

Most of the
uncertainty is in the first couple times I'm on **B** schedule, or if there is
ever a scenario where I have no **B** schedule days for a long continuous period
of time. My answer to the latter point is just to make a very visible checklist
in my room
for days where I meet this goal, so that even on **A** days I'm still (hopefully)
reinforcing the habit for **B** days.

## Goal 4: Legacy/Running
I want to run a 5k at faster than 6-minute-mile pace.

This goal is in somewhat of a separate category from the ones above. Whereas those
are intended to form a coherent foundation for future monthly-goal settings, this
is an extention of an existing long-term goal that I've had for the past ~2 years.
I'm including it here because it is something I want to invest effort into improving
each month this year, and I can piggyback on this format. Besides, the whole *point*
of these monthly goals is so that I can eventually achieve some object-level projects.
Having an object-level goal running in parallel that doesn't interfere with the
other goals seems like a good way to keep things grounded.

The overall objective in this category is well-defined, but I expect it to take significantly
longer than a month to achieve from where I am now (my fastest 5k was at 6:58 pace).
I got injured again towards the end of December, so my specific goals for this month
are around recovery and prevention of future injuries. Namely I want to work on
incorporating strength training and cross training into my routine while slowly
ramping mileage back up. The exact mileage will depend on how I'm feeling and whether
I feel sufficiently recovered, but I hope to at least get back to 20mpw 
(miles per week) by the end of the month.

As for strength and cross training, I currently do rock climbing once a week. But
this doesn't feel sufficient. I want to do 3 days of strength-type training per
week in January, so I'm adding one weekly group fitness class, and one day where
I will do standard weight training at a gym.

For the group class, the primary reason I might not do it is if I forget to bring
an extra set of workout clothes with me to work. I set a phone reminder to bring
clothes those days, and will keep an extra backup set at work in case I forget.
With these I expect 85% likelihood of doing the group class each week.

As for the weight-training day, I've just decided to
replace my usual run that day with the strength training, and add a run to what
used to be my rest day. My primary concern is that I won't do this on **B**
schedule days if I don't go to the gym, but in this case I can just do bodyweight
exercises at home. I only have 70% likelihood here, mostly because it wouldn't
be terribly surprising if I missed one **B** day. I'm much more confident that
I will hit this at least 3 of the 4 weeks (90%).

## Parting Thoughts
Based on the numbers I've given so far, the likelihood of achieving all of the
non-legacy goals is ~30% (note that I'm assuming these are not independent events,
since I think doing well in one area makes it more likely to do will in another
and vice-versa). This honestly still feels like it might be too low, I might
not be using high-enough conditional dependency assumptions. These are also
fairly sensitive to the amount of social support I end up receiving for this
initiative. But if I do
end up doing better than these predict, I can be more confident in my ability
to follow through in future months, especially as the accomplished goals themselves
will give me time and struture to support more ambitious future work.

edit: you can find my retrospective for these goals [here]({% post_url 2020-02-15-january-2020-retrospective %}).
