---
layout: post
title:  "Resilient Habits: Goals for April 2020"
date:   2020-07-10
categories: [goals]
tags: [2020goals]
---

Things didn't go well in
[March]({% post_url 2020-06-22-march-2020-retrospective %}){:target="_blank"}.
Previously all my habits and systems
were built off of my standard schedule of buses, libraries, and my work office.
With COVID-19 I lost all these anchor points and have had a hard time achieving
my goals.

My focus for this month is thus to get everything back on
track and to make my systems more resilient to this kind of volatility.

## Goal 1: Delineated Daily Schedule
My physical environment plays a major role in my habits, energy levels, and
motivation. The best way I've found to get myself to spend particular chunks of
time doing particular activities is to make sure I am in a physical location
that I associate as being reserved for that activity. For instance, I did my
morning work block on the bus into work, then my work day in the office, then
productive meandering on the bus home. On weekends I would often go to the
library to get work done. Home was reserved for rest and relaxation.

Unfortunately, nowadays everything is home. There are no buses or libraries or
offices. Productive time, work time, and rest time all need to happen at the
same place, and I'm really not good at that. So my first goal for the month is
to craft clear boundaries between different types of time, and try to get into
the habit of better associating the time with the task. There are two components
of this: physical location and environmental transitions.

First, I want to make sure I have separate physical locations that I keep
reserved for each type of activity. To this end I've set up a work-from-home
office in my room, and bought a room divider to section it off from the rest of
my room (which is reserved for fun/relaxation time). When I need to do personal
work, I have another room where I can work at a table on my laptop. Thus I now
have a proxy for the "bus" and "office" I used to anchor my previous habits.

Second, I want to have a routine for transitioning between schedule chunks and
the associated physical location, which I hypothesize will help establish the
boundaries and will get me mentally prepared for the next activity. These are
"at-home" equivalents of things like walking to and from the bus.

The first "transition" happens as soon as I wake up, first thing in the morning.
I will go outside, listen to a particular "morning" song, and spend 5 minutes
stretching, shaking out, warming-up, and generally moving. I'll refer to this as
the "upward transition". It's important that
this happens first thing in the morning, because in the lack of external
pressure I often fall into the failure mode of laying in bed on my phone and
procrastinating on getting started with the day, which doesn't get it off to a
good start. After this I'm in "productivity mode" until I do another transition.

In "productivity mode" I spend an hour doing personal work, then 8 hours of
professional work, and then an hour of productive meandering. Importantly,
during this time I am __not allowed__ to use the bed or couch, which are reserved
for relaxation time. This is to get into the habit of treating this time as
actual locked-into-work time as if I was in the office, and avoid another common
failure mode around constantly tempting myself into taking long breaks. In
general I should treat this time as if I'm in the office, and avoid doing things
I wouldn't be comfortable doing there.

To transition from "productivity mode" to "no-obligation personal mode" I will
go outside, exercise for at least 15 minutes, and shower (which I will refer to
as the "downward transition"). Usually I expect the
exercise to be a run, but anything active is sufficient. In addition to
providing a transition trigger, this also gives me a mental break and feeds
into my fitness goals. During the exercise I can listen to podcasts, or just do
some processing of what happened over the day. After the downward transition I
can now access "relaxing" locations like the bed and couch, and should avoid
work locations where possible.

So far I've been talking specifically about weekdays, but on weekends I want to
do the same transitions. The key difference is how much productive time I have
between the two transitions. So on weekend days where I do my weekend work block,
that will be the only thing in between the transitions. On the other weekend day
where I have a full day of rest, I will just do the downward transition
immediately after the upward transition, and spend the rest of the day in
relaxation mode.

As an aside, I will just note that the specifics here can be flexible as the
situation demands. For instance, if it's raining and I don't want to do the
transitions outside, I can do analogous activities inside.

Given that I fell off the wagon in March, the success of the overall
monthly-goals project depends on doing this month's goals well. To promote
adherence, I've done some visualizations and transition practice runs at the
end of March,
and have written out an April calendar in a visible location, with each day
separated into 4 quarters. The first quarter represents whether I successfully did
an upward transition first thing in the morning. The fourth quarter
represents whether I did my downward transition before doing any activities that
shouldn't be allowed in productive mode. (The other two quarters are discussed
in the following goal).

Every day I will check off the appropriate sections of the calendar to track my
progress. If I can get 100% adherence of quarters 1 and 4 up to and through
Sunday, April 12th, then
I will spend some money and throw a fun even with some friends as a reward.

I am fairly confident (95%) that I'll stick to upward transitions on weekdays,
after a couple trial runs and realizing how much I enjoy it (turns out that
basking in the outdoors for a few minutes with some good music and pleasant
stretching is fun, who knew?) This seems high, but is actually now confident I
feel. I'm less confident (80%) on weekends, mostly due to the temptation to laze
in bed in the morning, which is what I usually do. The only reason the
prediction is this high is because 5 minutes is a small investment, I'm tracking
things with a reward incentive, and I sent these goals out to my challenge
network beforehand.

The downward transition is where I expect more difficulty (85% on weekdays and
80% on weekends, assuming I do the upward transition). On weekdays I'm concerned
that I'll just feel tired and unmotivated at the end of the day, and I haven't
yet established habits of exercising on non-running days. On weekends I'm just
worried it will feel too annoying for rest days. I will try to remain vigilant
the first couple weekends, with phone reminders set, and afterwards I don't
expect too much trouble.

## Goal 2: Re-establish Habits
The habits I've built up from January to mid-March include:
- An hour of productive time before work on weekday mornings
- 45 minutes of "productive meandering" each weekday after work
- One 2.5-hour productivity block each weekend
- Usage of a backlog/task-prioritization system
- Slowly building up running mileage

In the latter half of march I was able to re-establish my morning productivity,
running, and prioritization habits. That leaves post-work "meandering" and
weekend productivity blocks as habits which I haven't yet re-established.

The meandering goal is simple: after work and before the downward transition
I'll take a quick break, go to my
personal productivity spot, and spend an hour doing whatever productive activity
captures my fancy in the moment. This is a fairly low-intensity time, so it
shouldn't be too aversive.

As for the weekend work blocks,
one problem I've noticed is that it isn't clear what kinds of activities should
"count" towards them. Does it matter if I would do the task by default
anyways? Does doing taxes count as focused time? Does laundry? Attending EA
Global? These "default" activities don't help establish new habits as I was 
going to do them anyways, but they still cost time and energy which
makes it difficult to do them _in addition_ to other focused work. I'm going to
attempt to draw an admittedly-fuzzy boundary where regular "maintenance" tasks
like laundry don't count, but one-off tasks like doing taxes do count. This
means that a number of weekends will have the 2.5-hour commitment met by
default, which is fine. In the lack of such externally-scheduled tasks, I will
spend at least 2.5 hours on one day per weekend doing focused work in between
the upward and downward transitions. As usual, if I am completely busy on the
weekends for whatever reason and can't do this block, then the goal will no
longer apply.

Specifying the goal is simple, but actually sticking to it is another matter.
I'm going to be using the same tracking and adherence system from the above
goal, with the calendar divided into quarters. The second quarter represents
whether I did my morning productivity time and professional work time. These are
combined into a single entry since I was already doing them consistently at the
end of March, so they seem low-risk. The third quarter represents whether I did
productive meandering. If I am able to check both of these quarters off on every
day up to and through Sunday April 12th, then I have another reward set up for
myself. Note that this is independent from the similar system in [Goal
1](#goal-1-delineated-daily-schedule),
but I expect them to be symbiotic.

I am confident (95%) that I will successfully stick to my morning work block, as
I've already been successful in re-establishing it so far. I'm less confident
(70%) that I will succeed with productive meandering each weekday. This seems
kind of high given the historical data, but it also feels correct. This goes up
to (80%) if I stick to my transitions properly. Finally, I predict (75%) that
I'll stick to weekend work blocks, mostly due to concerns that something will
come up that I didn't predict, and will throw me off. I'll stick to my usual
rule where if it's obvious that I would have made an exception for a situation
if I had the foresight to think of it in advance, then I can treat it as an
exception when it comes up. If it's not obvious I will be conservative and treat
it as "not an exception", to avoid the temptation to convince myself that
everything should be an exception.

## Goal 3: Catch Up on the Backlog
Right now I'm spending a lot of my productive time in a
not-particularly-targeted manner, based on external inputs like email. Instead
I'd like to focus on clearing out the highest priority items on my
backlog/task-tracker. One notable example is blog posts, which I'm quite a bit
behind on. I would like to clear off all the items from my highest-value bucket,
as long as they take less than 3 hours to complete.

In the absence of unexpected high-priority work popping up, I predict (90%) that
I can catch up on blog posts and (70%) that I can get down to at most 3 tasks in
my highest-value bucket.
